---
layout: post
title: "Erosion as a metaphor for learning"
date: 2026-06-18
---
I often visualize the process of both writing and learning as erosion-shaped. What I mean is that erosion makes me think
of the slow process of water hitting a shore, making small bits of almost unnoticeable progress, punctuated by the
occasional substantial structural reconfiguration. This feels structurally a lot like how learning works: waves washing
up against a broad seawall of confusion, ignorance and ineffectualness, and then a sudden closing of multiple knowledge
or skill gaps when things click into place.

The concept is sort of similar to the idea that "every journey begins with a single step" but I find it a bit more
evocative and precise.

The reason I find the erosion framing more evocative is that I rarely perceive learning as a linear process. When, for
example, I practice something on the piano, it feels *more* like I am queueing up a set of experiences for future
processing than like a literal step function improvement. This isn't to say that I don't see *some* progress during
practice itself, but I often find that the real progress happens either in the background or overnight.

Writing feels very similar to me. In fact, when I wrote Jumping into C++, I spent very little time on the actual writing
(sub 200 hours, as I wrote about [here](https://medium.com/@alexallain/ten-minutes-a-day-e2fa1084f924)). Most of the
work happened in the background.

I find this framing useful because it is motivating in the face of confusion and uncertainty in a way that thinking of
a linear journey--or even a squiggly line with false starts--is not. Thinking about erosion transforms a sense of pure
*stasis* from demotivating to an appreciation that something unseeable is still happening (you can rarely see
meaningful erosion from a single wave, but give it time and you won't have a house on the shore anymore). This helps
address the way that skill plateaus feel so damn demotivating when it feels like "it isn't working"--instead of
expecting every action to have an immediate impact, it's about some accumulation of incremental actions that eventually
lead somewhere.

So the erosion framing pushes me toward taking almost *any* action related to what I'm working on, with the faith that
like water lapping on the coast, something is happening even if it's not yet visible. All I need to do is take some
action to initiate the process.

It encourages me to do things like spend five minutes practicing piano when I walk by, rather than thinking I need to
spend a lot of time locking in some gains.

It pushes me to just write some words down when I'm working on an essay, and it makes editing--which is truly a form of
sculptive erosion--feel like an equal part of the work. (Arguably it *is* the work.)
